openl2tp(7)			OpenL2TP Manual			   openl2tp(7)



NAME
       openl2tp - General documentation

SYNOPSIS
       This  document  describes  the  general	features  of OpenL2TP, a dual-
       licensed, open-source implementation of L2TP for Linux.

       OpenL2TP is ideal for use in any of the following environments:-

          as an L2TP VPN service for deployment on servers at the  workplace,
	   providing L2TP VPN access for home workers.

          as  a  component in commercial Embedded Linux systems, such as home
	   gateways or even big telecommunications switches.

          as an L2TP client for desktop users.

PROTOCOL OVERVIEW
       L2TP was designed by the IETF (Internet	Engineering  Task  Force,  the
       internet	 standards body) to tunnel one or more PPP sessions through an
       IP tunnel across an IP network. It utilizes two types of messages, con-
       trol  messages  and  data  messages.  Control  messages are used in the
       establishment, maintenance and clearing of tunnels and  sessions.  Data
       messages are used to encapsulate PPP frames being carried over the tun-
       nel. Control messages utilize a reliable control channel within L2TP to
       guarantee  delivery.  Data  messages  are not retransmitted when packet
       loss occurs.

       When two L2TP peers have established a tunnel, sessions may be added to
       the  tunnel.  A	tunnel may carry up to 65535 sessions. Control message
       exchanges are used to setup each L2TP session. When an L2TP session  is
       in  place,  PPP	data  packets may be passed over the (unreliable) data
       channel of the session. Thus data packets are encapsulated first by  an
       L2TP  header and then a packet transport such as UDP, Frame Relay, ATM,
       etc.

	  +-------------------+
	  | PPP Frames	      |
	  +-------------------+	   +-----------------------+
	  | L2TP Data Messages|	   | L2TP Control Messages |
	  +-------------------+	   +-----------------------+
	  | L2TP Data Channel |	   | L2TP Control Channel  |
	  | (unreliable)      |	   | (reliable)		   |
	  +------------------------------------------------+
	  |	 Packet Transport (UDP, FR, ATM, etc.)	   |
	  +------------------------------------------------+

	    Diagram reproduced from RFC2661


   L2TP Access Concentrator (LAC)
       The LAC takes PPP sessions from ingress interfaces, which may be	 regu-
       lar  modems,  ATM  (PPPoA),  Frame  Relay  (PPPoFR) or ethernet (PPPoE)
       interfaces and tunnels them through L2TP tunnels.  The LAC might create
       a new tunnel on-demand for the PPP session or it might choose to use an
       existing L2TP tunnel if it already exists.

       In the simplest case, the PPP client and LAC are located	 on  the  same
       host and only one PPP session is used per L2TP tunnel. Some L2TP imple-
       mentations, most notably Microsoft's, have this limitation.

   L2TP Network Server (LNS)
       The LNS is typically the server side of an L2TP connection. It  accepts
       requests	 from the network to create new tunnels or add new sessions to
       tunnels. The LNS may terminate the PPP sessions locally or it may  for-
       ward them via egress PPP interfaces.

FEATURE SUMMARY
       OpenL2TP	 is a complete implementation of RFC2661 - Layer Two Tunneling
       Protocol, Version 2. Key features are:-

          Operation as both LAC and LNS simultanesously is supported. A  sin-
	   gle server may be a LAC for some tunnels and a LNS for others.

          Incoming and outgoing tunnels and sessions are supported.

          Multiple  tunnels  and  multiple sessions in those tunnels are sup-
	   ported.  The maximum number of tunnels and sessions is limited only
	   by  available  system  memory (max 65535 tunnels and 65535 sessions
	   per tunnel) or by system and user-configured limits.

          All four session types are supported, i.e. LAC/LNS  Incoming/Outgo-
	   ing Calls.

          Multiple tunnels between the same two L2TP hosts is supported.

          Tunnel,  session  and  PPP  parameters may be defined in named pro-
	   files, simplifying the management interface and  allowing  specific
	   parameter  values  to  be used for specific incoming tunnels (those
	   created by remote request over the network).

          Is able to parse and record	all  standard  L2TP  AVPs  defined  in
	   RFC2661.  It checks that all required AVPs are present in each mes-
	   sage and generates error log messages if unexpected AVPs are	 seen.

          Control  messages are handled by a userland daemon, openl2tpd.  All
	   L2TP data packets are handled by the kernel.

          Trace messages optionally logged using syslog can  be  enabled/dis-
	   abled  at system, tunnel and session levels. Thus to debug problems
	   on a busy system, tracing can be safely enabled only	 for  specific
	   entities without flooding the system with messages from other unin-
	   teresting entities.

          Management interface uses Sun  RPC,	making	OpenL2TP  particularly
	   suitable  for  embedded chassis environments such as telco systems.
	   No config files to worry about!

          Bundled with an intuitive command-line management application  that
	   uses	 TAB  syntax completion, command history and context sensitive
	   help.

          Employs a plugin architecture to  allow  third  parties  to	easily
	   extend or integrate OpenL2TP with other software, e.g. PPP, RADIUS,
	   B-RAS etc etc. Includes a plugin for	 interfacing  to  pppd(8)  but
	   other PPP implementations may be used if desired via a plugin.

          Supports  automatic	IP address assignment from local address pools
	   if other address allocation mechanisms (e.g. RADIUS) are  not  con-
	   figured.  Use ippoold(8).

          Locally  created  tunnels  may optionally be designated persistent,
	   causing them to try to recreate themselves should the  tunnel  fail
	   for some reason. Any locally created sessions in persistent tunnels
	   are also automatically restored  if/when  the  tunnel  restablishes
	   itself. This is useful if openl2tpd is used as an L2TP client.

          Interoperates  with Cisco IOS 12.2 and Microsoft W2K/XP (when IPSEC
	   support disabled).

PROFILES
       Profiles allow a set of tunnel, session or PPP parameters to be config-
       ured  and then referred to by name. For tunnels and sessions created by
       a local administrator, profiles simply offer a convenient shorthand for
       specifying  several  parameters	in  one go. However, profiles are most
       useful to specify parameters to be used in the future when L2TP tunnels
       or sessions are created by remote request over the network.

       The following profile types exist:-

       TUNNEL PROFILE  Provides	 a  named  set of L2TP tunnel parameters which
		       may be used when creating tunnels locally (by  specify-
		       ing the tunnel profile name when the tunnel is created)
		       or when tunnels are created by remote request.

       SESSION PROFILE Provides a named set of L2TP session  parameters	 which
		       may be used when creating sessions locally (by specify-
		       ing the session profile name when the session  is  cre-
		       ated) or when sessions are created by remote request.

       PPP PROFILE     Provides	 a named set of PPP parameters which are to be
		       used when creating PPP connections in L2TP sessions.

       PEER PROFILE    Identifies parameters to be used when connecting to  an
		       L2TP  peer.  Peers  are	identified  by	name  or by IP
		       address / netmask.  The peer profile specifies  default
		       tunnel,	session	 and PPP profile names which are to be
		       used when communicating with the peer.

       An administrator may create as many profiles as desired. The naming  of
       profiles	 is  scoped by profile type; it is possible to create a tunnel
       profile called one and a session profile called one, for example.

       The profile name default is reserved; it is the name  of	 default  pro-
       files  which are used by the system when no other profile can be found.

       Every parameter of a tunnel or session profile may be specified when  a
       tunnel  or  session is created by a local administrator. If, therefore,
       OpenL2TP is being used as a simple, manually  configured	 L2TP  client,
       tunnel  and session profiles aren't strictly necessary; the administra-
       tor just gives values for all non-default parameters when creating  the
       tunnel or session.

       When  new  L2TP	tunnels, L2TP sessions or PPP connections are created,
       parameter values for any parameters not specified in the create request
       are derived from default profiles. These default profiles are automati-
       cally created by the system; their parameter values may be modified but
       the default profiles cannot be deleted. Default profiles thus provide a
       convenient way to override the default behavior of OpenL2TP.

       For incoming tunnel, session and PPP  setup  requests,  parameters  are
       derived from tunnel, session and PPP profiles named in the peer profile
       that matches the incoming peer. Thus, to configure a server  to	accept
       incoming	 tunnel	 requests  from host X, using a shared password Y, the
       local administrator would do the following:-

          create a tunnel profile and specify the tunnel password,  authenti-
	   cation mode and any other L2TP tunnel parameters to be used for the
	   peer.

          create a peer profile, giving it the same name as the  hostname  of
	   the remote peer. Specify the tunnel profile name of the tunnel pro-
	   file previously created.

       If multiple tunnel peers share the same password, the same tunnel  pro-
       file may be used for each peer.

       Note  that  for	further flexibility, tunnel profiles allow the session
       profile and PPP profile to be named. Thus, when a new L2TP  session  is
       created	in  a  tunnel,	if  a  session	profile isn't specified in the
       request, its session parameters are derived from	 the  session  profile
       called  out via the tunnel profile, or via the session profile named in
       the peer profile if the tunnel profile did not include a	 session  pro-
       file  name.  Similarly, PPP parameters are derived from the PPP profile
       specified in the request, or in the session profile, or in  the	tunnel
       profile or in the peer profile. This feature is known as profile inher-
       itance.

SECURE TUNNEL ESTABLISHMENT
       The L2TP standard,  documented  in  RFC2661,  provides  mechanisms  for
       secure tunnel establishment.

       Tunnels	may  optionally	 be protected using a shared password (secret)
       which must be configured at both LAC and LNS. This may be used to  pre-
       vent  unwanted  tunnels being created; the LAC or LNS sends a challenge
       to the peer using the  shared  tunnel  password	and  expects  a	 valid
       response before allowing the new tunnel to be created.

       To  prevent  hackers  from eavesdropping on L2TP protocol packets, some
       protocol fields (called Attribute Value Pairs, or AVPs) in L2TP	proto-
       col  messages  may be hidden (encrypted). This so-called AVP hiding may
       be enabled when the tunnel is created. Either or both LAC and  LNS  may
       use AVP hiding in L2TP messages that it sends.

       OpenL2TP	 provides Simple and Challenge tunnel authentication modes for
       incoming tunnels.

       SIMPLE	 accepts the tunnel only if a matching	peer  profile  can  be
		 found for the peer; a shared tunnel password is not required.
		 Thus, by creating one or  more	 peer  profiles,  an  operator
		 determines  the  peer	host names and/or IP address ranges of
		 permitted remote peers without needing to use passwords..

       CHALLENGE accepts the tunnel only if both  SIMPLE  authentication  suc-
		 ceeds and an L2TP challenge is requested by the peer. This is
		 the most secure mode, as it enforces the use  of  L2TP	 Chal-
		 lenge and Peer Profiles to identify a set of permitted remote
		 L2TP peers.

       By  default,  neither  SIMPLE  nor  CHALLENGE  authentication  mode  is
       enabled; L2TP requests are accepted from any remote peer.

L2TP LINUX KERNEL DRIVER
       In  order  to  exchange	data packets over an L2TP session, the bundled
       PPP-over-L2TP Linux device driver must be installed. It	may  be	 built
       statically into the kernel or as a loadable binary module.

       The  L2TP server will partially operate without the L2TP kernel support
       in place; L2TP tunnels and sessions are created as normal, but no  data
       can  be passed through the L2TP session. This may be useful for testing
       the protocol but it isn't useful for  much  else;  indeed,  many	 third
       party L2TP implementations such as Cisco will close the session when it
       fails to do PPP link setup.

MANAGEMENT INTERFACE
       OpenL2TP departs from UNIX tradition in that it	does  not  use	config
       files.  Instead	it  uses Sun RPC (Remote Procedure Call) to provide an
       extensive binary API to L2TP servers over a network.

       Sun RPC is used in preference to proprietary message passing over sock-
       ets for several reasons:-

          RPC	handles	 all architecture differences. It is possible to run a
	   L2TP control application on, say an Intel Pentium  CPU  to  control
	   several  L2TP  servers  running on PowerPC CPUs, for example. It is
	   also ideal for Linux Cluster environments.

          The management interface is defined in a Structured Definition Lan-
	   guage  from which C (or even Java) code can be generated. Therefore
	   a single interface definition describes the application API.	 Read-
	   ers interested in RPC should see rpc(3).

          RPC	lends  itself  to  several new network management technologies
	   such as XML, SOAP, JAX and others.

       For simple installations on a standard Linux workstation,  the  use  of
       RPC  could  be  seen as over-complicated and a security risk (since RPC
       requests can arrive over an IP network). Whilst	this  might  be	 true,
       OpenL2TP	 is  also  targetted  for easy deployment in commercial system
       chassis environments where CPUs on multiple boards in the  chassis  are
       controlled by other CPUs in the system. The ability to control OpenL2TP
       over a closed network makes for much easier integration into industrial
       solutions.

       However,	 many installations will not need remote management capability
       so remote RPC  requests	are  by	 default  disabled.  The  L2TP	server
       openl2tpd  must	be  started  with the -R command line switch to enable
       remote RPC.

       It is recommended that when remote RPC is enabled, a firewall  is  used
       to protect the system from external attack.

INTEROPABILITY
   Microsoft Windows 2000 and Windows XP
          By  default,	 Microsoft  L2TP uses IPSEC for all L2TP tunnels. This
	   implementation has not been tested with IPSEC. To disable IPSEC  on
	   Microsoft systems, see

       http://support.microsoft.com/default.aspx?scid=kb;en-us;q310109&sd=tech.

             Microsoft	 L2TP  clients negotiate a PPP MTU of only 1400 bytes.
	      Duh!

   Cisco IOS 12.2
          Cisco does not handle hidden	 AVPs  in  the	SCCRQ  message.	 As  a
	   workaround,	OpenL2TP turns off AVP hiding of all attributes in the
	   SCCRQ, even if AVP hiding is enabled in the tunnel.	Unlike	Cisco,
	   OpenL2TP can handle hidden AVPs in the SCCRQ message.

          Cisco  advertises  a	 Receive  Window  Size (RWS) of 800 by default
	   which seems way too large -- RFC2661 says the default should be 10.

UNIMPLEMENTED FEATURES
       The  L2TP  specification	 includes a few optional features that are not
       currently implemented by OpenL2TP.  These are:-


       DATA PACKET REORDERING
	       Data packets optionally carry sequence numbers. Although
	       these  sequence	numbers	 are  never  used to retransmit
	       unacknowledged data packets, they may  be  used	by  the
	       receiver to try to reorder out-of-sequence packets. Cur-
	       rently, OpenL2TP simply discards such packets.

       PPP PROXY
	       PPP Proxy allows a LAC or LNS to shortcut PPP LCP  nego-
	       tiation	by  extracting	PPP  configuration messages and
	       providing them to the peer with the L2TP	 session  setup
	       request.	 The  peer  passes this data to its PPP session
	       and the two PPP sessions continue with  PPP  negotiation
	       as if they were always directly connected.  Although the
	       OpenL2TP API supports it, proxy PPP requires major  work
	       in  the standard UNIX PPP server application pppd(8) and
	       Linux kernel. However, OpenL2TP already	recognizes  the
	       PPP  PROXY parameters of L2TP protocol messages and will
	       report attributes that it receives from its  peer  using
	       the current tunnel API. PPP PROXY is useful only in sys-
	       tems implementing some form of Broadband	 Remote	 Access
	       Server (B-RAS).

       PMTU DISCOVERY
	       Strictly	 speaking,  PMTU Discovery is not called out in
	       the L2TP specification. This mechanism allows a host  to
	       determine  the  MTU  of	the  network  path to its peer.
	       Although it can be requested when a tunnel  is  created,
	       it is currently unimplemented.

LIMITATIONS
       Although	 OpenL2TP  is  a  comprehensive L2TP implementation, it
       does have some limitations. These are:-

          It creates one UDP socket per tunnel and a temporary	 socket
	   (as	needed)	 for kernel interaction.  The maximum number of
	   tunnels is therefore limited by the maximum number  of  file
	   descriptors that a single process may have open (MAX_FILES).
	   This is typically 1024 but may be adjusted using  ulimit(3).

          It  creates	one  PPPoL2TP socket per session. If pppd(8) is
	   used for PPP, these file descriptors are opened by the  pppd
	   process,  so	 don't	add  to	 the  file  descriptors used by
	   openl2tpd.  However, if all PPP sessions are controlled by a
	   single  PPP	process using a third party PPP implementation,
	   the maximum session count is again limited by MAX_FILES.

          If pppd(8) is used to  provide  PPP,	 one  pppd  process  is
	   spawned  for	 each  session. Although in virtual memory sys-
	   tems,  the  text  segment  (code)  is  shared  between   all
	   instances  of  pppd, each process has its own data and heap.
	   The heap alone can consume 1M of memory which can pose  real
	   problems to systems without swap space such as embedded sys-
	   tems.

          Internally, openl2tpd keeps lists of objects (tunnels,  ses-
	   sions,  ppp,	 profiles etc) in linear linked lists. When the
	   number of entries in its lists becomes large, system perfor-
	   mance  is  degraded because it takes a long time to walk the
	   lists to find contexts.  This  will	be  fixed  in  a  later
	   release.

          It  is not possible to run two instances of openl2tpd on the
	   same system because they will both try to register the  same
	   RPC service and one will fail.

REPORTING BUGS
       Please report bugs to <openl2tp-bugs@lists.sourceforge.net>.

SEE ALSO
       The following documents are also available in the OpenL2TP set:-

       openl2tpd(8)    describes how to invoke openl2tpd which	is  the
		       L2TP daemon.

       openl2tp_rpc(4) describes   the	RPC  interface	implemented  by
		       openl2tpd.  This interface may be used by an RPC
		       client application to control  openl2tpd .

       l2tpconfig(1)   describes the command line interface application
		       which is bundled with OpenL2TP distribution.  It
		       is  an  RPC client application, implementing the
		       interfaces documented in openl2tp_rpc(4).

       ippoold(8)      an IP address pool manager.



OpenL2TP		       10 September 2004		   openl2tp(7)
